We propose novel software for a silent speech interface (SSI) that uses deep learning for subvocal recognition
(SVR) to receive input and communicate with internet-enabled devices. Our goal is to create a non-invasive
brain-computer interface that encourages proliferation of AI assistants. EMG electrodes sit along the jawline
of the user and record neuromuscular subvocalization activity to interpret silent speech. Signals are then
amplified through a hardware board, processed in a data pipeline, and then passed to a machine learning
model which predicts what the user intends to say. Using a variant of EEGNet as a baseline, we propose to
create ML models that have phonetic recognition capabilities and can transcribe novel words and sentences in
real-time. Since our technology taps directly into subvocalized thoughts, we believe this interface can become
a fast and organic medium for communication with computers, AIs, and other humans.The objective of this project is to utilize modern
deep learning work to fill in the gaps of current
EMG signal analysis research. According to a
recent review of physiological signal research [4],
less than 10 papers were published in 2019 taking
advantage of deep learning for EMG.
Instead, much EMG signal analysis still utilizes
classical filtering techniques that have significantly
lower discriminative ability than neural networks.
Meltzner et al., 2017 [6] achieved 89% accuracy on
a 2500 word vocabulary using Markov Models and
Linear Discriminant Analysis, which lay between
classical and deep learning techniques. Papers
which use deep learning [2] have not yet developed
architectures complex enough to learn such large
vocabularies.
Our specific use-case to be investigated will be
subvocal recognition, an approach by which
subvocalized thoughts can be parsed much like

standard speech recognition. We will experiment
with modern deep learning architectures such as
transformers and variational autoencoders to
develop a subvocal recognition model. We would
also like to further the state of the art in applied
silent speech by utilizing our increases in accuracy
to interface with modern web technologies like
voice assistants. This is effectively the modern
equivalent of Jorgensen et al, 2005 [7] which could
recognize 6 subvocalized words in order to
interface with a simple web browser.
The overarching objective is to facilitate a
versatile silent speech interface serving as a fast
and organic medium for communication without
invasive hardware.As the capability of deep learning has increased
in recent years, voice assistants have advanced
alongside natural language processing. However,
there are constraints to usage of voice assistants
such as privacy and social norms, hindering
widespread adoption. Silent speech interfaces
provide an opportunity for this technology to be
truly utilized to its fullest potential. Our research
into deep learning for SVR will improve the
accuracy of SSIs, thereby enabling new use cases.
SSI technology will empower not only those who
desire to converse discreetly but also those who are
physically unable to communicate through speech.
In addition, as the situation of the global pandemic
continues to affect our daily lives, this technology
will allow for another mode of communication that
requires no physical contact or aerosols.NeuroTechSC is NeuroTechX’s student chapter
at the University of California, Santa Cruz. The
research group consists of 30 students divided into
five teams, each responsible for a different aspect
of the project: Hardware, Data, Machine Learning,
and UI. Each team has between five to eight
members and all are UCSC undergraduate students.
Our Hardware team is responsible for assembling
electronics, 3D designs, and taking recordings with
our custom 3D printed EMG headset. The Data
team develops pipelines to connect various parts of
the project as well as cleaning and preprocessing.
The Machine Learning team architects and trains
neural networks to recognize subvocalizations from
signal data. The UI team is creating web interfaces
for recording and testing, as well as integrations
with voice assistants and other novel web
applications.
